so how you been man um i've been doing
okay
still right yeah
um and you wanted to you'd ask me a
question on the scop podcast which i i
don't know if i answered coherently
oh yeah it's an interesting question of
um you said you had lots of questions
um yeah [ __ ] you guys were talking about
wait am i am i allowed to say [ __ ] you
i guess so i don't know okay well i'm
just because you've been doing this
longer than i have
yeah sure but i don't know if you have
different rules for your stream right
i don't know what the rules of my stream
i imagine you have some rules for your
stream right
i say [ __ ] okay gotcha all right we're
good to say [ __ ]
um it's always been a really interesting
question to me the um the difference
between like
respecting a person's autonomy um versus
uh superseding their autonomy for what
you perceive to be their benefit
um that question is yeah is a really
hard one i feel
um so in the case where if you have
somebody that you know is suicidal
um and has the means and the desire to
you know
commit suicide um what kind of state of
mind do they have to be in for you
to respect their decision is basically
the
a question that i've kind of wrestled
with a lot
so when you say you do you mean me
or do you mean a person
when i say you for a person who is
suicidal or person who is considering
stopping somebody from committing
suicide yeah so if the person is
considering stopping someone
who is the you like a general person or
me
uh well i mean i guess it i mean at one
point in my life it was me
um it could be anybody um i imagine for
you it's probably a bit different
it is if you're working in the capacity
of a therapist you have an obligation
to contact somebody yeah obviously so um
yeah it's more just kind of like a a
question of philosophy in general not
necessarily an occupational question
yeah so i think the the main thing that
i look at is what
whether they have so if we think about
consent and choice
yeah so you know when does a doctor so
we're going to talk about doctors for a
second and then we can
expand when does a doctor have the right
to overcome someone's choice
and generally speaking we have the right
when that person
when we didn't deem their consciousness
or their decision-making capacity to be
impaired
yeah and and so you know what i do
in terms of like you know if someone's
depressed like they'll make statements
that
really suggest that they're impaired so
if someone says the world would be
better off without me
and you know generally speaking i mean i
imagine that that can be true
in some cases but generally speaking
most people
will you know their family members don't
actually want to see them die
or their friends and so that suggests to
me that their
their cognitive process is impaired at
some point
so you know if they have the capacity to
make
good decisions and that can be impaired
by mental illness
so that's one piece thoughts
um so there's an interesting catch-22
that's kind of brought up here
where um some people look at things
like um medically assisted suicide
and some people will say hey you know
we ought to have the ability to end our
lives should we choose to
um now for some people this is just a
question of like end-of-life stuff so
for instance if you're dying of a
terminal disease should you be able to
but for other people you know they say
well if you're in your 20s or 30s if
you're suffering or combating mental
illness you should have the ability to
you know end your life if you choose to
um some people would say that the
criteria
for determining whether or not you're of
sound mind will always preclude somebody
from committing suicide though
so for instance yeah so how do you is is
so the question is like well if somebody
feels suicidal i think for a person of
healthy mind you would say well there
must be some
sort of like cognitive impairment there
which would then make it so that nobody
could essentially ever
commit suicide not that i'm advocating
for it it sounds like i am sorry but
yeah so how do you deal with that um
catch 22 is there ever
a spot where somebody could be of sound
mind or they're not suffering from a
terminal disease
and they want to commit suicide i guess
so i'm going to say something once again
which i think we have to be careful i'm
not advocating for suicide yeah of
course yeah yeah sorry this conversation
is really weird to have published
yep no no it's a good conversa i think
it's an important conversation so i'll
say something that i think
may be a little bit shocking i'd say
half of the people that i've worked with
that are suicidal are not suicidal due
to a mental illness
so we have a big mental illness you said
not due to mcdonald's no so this is this
is a really interesting
assumption that has started to happen in
our society
so suicidality is a symptom
right other mental illness so it's a
sign like if you're bipolar
or you have trauma or you're depressed
you can be suicidal
but you can also have none of those
things and be suicidal
so the first thing to understand is that
suicidality is not exclusive
to mental illness so if you look at like
for example japanese culture
or you know even like suicide bombers
like i mean you can make an argument
about whether they're mentally ill or
not
but there there's you know there's
evidence culturally that
people have motives for suicide that are
not due to mental illness
and the most shocking thing that i've
encountered is actually working with
people who are suicidal and they're not
actually like cognitively impaired so
they may
sound like they're depressed but they
genuinely like look at a life
where they don't see a way forward
and so they just want to tap out and if
you really like assess them in terms of
of depression
you know they don't meet the dsm
criteria
oh maybe i maybe i just
i see a lot of people can move to sub
mode but
maybe i said something that's not really
good but um
you know that there are people who uh
i've talked to and it's scary so like
they're my patients but i wouldn't
diagnose them with like clinical
depression
so there are certain criteria of
clinical depression which they don't
meet i still think that they shouldn't
kill themselves
um and i i work with them to work on
their suicidal so that they're no longer
suicidal and i tend to be generally
successful with that
but i do think that it's possible to be
suicidal and not have mental illness
and then coming to your catch-22 so i
think the issue there is do you assume
that suicidality comes from mental
illness because if you don't assume that
then the catch-22 goes away right
um the argument that i'm the argument
that i'm hearing is that suicidality
is evidence of mental illness therefore
it's a catch-22 and no one can
kill themselves yeah i'm sorry i'm
trying to be very careful my words i
wouldn't say necessarily meant
um i wouldn't necessarily say evidence
of mental illness i would say evidence
of well people would say evidence of
mental impairment
um so for instance when you say somebody
could not be mentally ill
but still could be suicidal like i'm
curious because i could read that in two
ways
um one i could read is that if you're
not mentally ill and you're suicidal
then on either one hand then you are
perfectly within your rights to feel
suicidal like it seems like you're not
mentally impaired so you have all the
tools available to you to make that
decision
but then on the second hand i could say
like well you're not mentally ill and
you're still suicidal that seems
incredibly irrational
um like there's no reason for this at
all um which way do you lean then on
that are you leaning more towards the
former than the latter or
i'm sorry can you say that again so like
if somebody doesn't have a mental
illness and they're suicidal
would you assume then that that decision
is very reasonable because they don't
have a mental illness and they're
able to think through it or would you
assume that it's very unreasonable
because you're not even mentally ill yet
you still feel suicidal
i don't like the word reasonable so i
i'd say that
i can i'd say it's understandable right
so i don't think that people should kill
themselves
but i think starting off with the
presumption
that you the reason you want to kill
yourself
is because you're impaired is an
incredibly
invalidating approach sure right it
discounts their entire perspective
if we say oh you're suicidal because
your brain is busted
there's something wrong with you that
just completely invalidates any actual
concerns
they have about the world so i don't
think that that's actually healthy so i
think it's
in a sense it's reasonable and that's
how you get it to change right like you
meet them kind of where they're at if
someone says
i'm 35 years old i've never been on a
date with a girl that i'm going to be
alone for the rest of my life i want to
kill myself
like it's reasonable i think for them to
feel that way and
also i don't think they should do that
and that's what you have to work on
because the cool thing is as you talk to
someone
about their reasons for suicidality you
then begin to see the path
of how to make them not suicidal because
if this person if what they want is like
companionship in life like that's what
you should work on
yeah i i agree with you there the the
only worry then is that um
how reflective can you be without like
um
without i don't say without pushing them
towards it but like say a person it
feels somewhat suicidal
um they express those concerns too and
they give the reasons why
you're understanding and reflective of
the language they use and then they feel
like they've gotten affirmation in that
and then they commit suicide
because they feel like their feelings
have been validated is that a worry ever
or
so the data actually suggests that
talking to people and validating their
feelings of suicide does not increase
suicidal behavior
so that's a big concern that people have
right is that you don't talk about it
and if you talk about it you validate
them they're more likely to do it
whereas
in my experience it's been the exact
opposite so what happens when you
validate their experience
is then like at least one person
understands them and then if i
understand them and then i say
hey like maybe you shouldn't do this yet
like can we work on this for a little
while
the response that i get overwhelming is
like yeah okay fine
so i actually find that you know in
validating someone's
suicidal feelings and understanding the
depth of their despair
is the first step in like helping them
change their life
because if you say like yeah your
complaints
are dumb then like how are you gonna
change your life
gotcha okay interesting
does that resolve your catch 22 or no
um well so
my original catch 22 was that it felt it
feels like
um being suicidal in and of itself
can be evidence of some sort of
impairment
your response is that that's not
necessarily true that you can still
approach a person who is suicidal you
can be
reflected with your language you can
have a conversation with them
what do you do so i guess chasing that
down a little bit more what do you do if
you are reflective
you do have those conversations but
they're still pretty set on
on committing suicide in a
non-professional role what do you think
you have an extra legal obligation there
or
extra moral obligation there to
intervene or what
yeah i think you do have a moral
obligation to intervene because i don't
know
that the average person is able to
assess
for capacity right so we're
professionally trained in assessing
someone's
capacity to make decisions and when
someone's thinking is impaired and when
someone's thinking is not impaired
i don't know that the average person
knows how to do that
so like i think because you're not
professionally trained
it's something that if someone is about
to kill themselves i think you're
morally obligated to try to intervene
and at least get them evaluated by
someone
who is who knows how to evaluate suicide
gotcha okay right and the other way to
think about it is like this may be
it may be incorrect at times but
like let me put it to you this way if
you're walking down the street and you
see someone drowning in a lake
do you think you should try to help them
um in that case yeah for sure right but
what if they
are drowning as part of a suicide
attempt
um i mean i'm assuming you don't have
access to that information right
exactly so since you don't have access
to the
information of their impairment of mind
you err on the side of saving the life
[Music]
and if you do have like a more intimate
relationship with the person what then
do you still err on the side of they
need to be they need to at least get one
consultation with a professional first
or absolutely
right so like the fact that you're
intimate with them may in turn
impair your judgment objectively
and so to have have them get an
evaluation by a professional i think is
absolutely a good idea
gotcha what do you think um
yeah maybe yeah i'll think about it you
for usually for big topics like this i
usually sleep on it a few days and then
i
have like a better opinion of it but
yeah it's stuff to think about yeah
it sounded like you had a lot of
questions is that
um oh well i mean not well not like
hours were the questions actually i'm
just really curious what you're
what you're thinking what's down this
path um
how are you feeling in general good
overall well that's good yeah we're um
yeah i spoke to you uh some number of
months ago
you feel like your perspective at all
has changed um being a little bit more
in this world
maybe not perspective on mental health
but like on like streamers in general or
this world of journals or anything
that's like surprised you or shocked you
um or is everything panned out about as
you thought it would or
so nothing is panned out how i thought
it would
um i i'd say that i have learned immense
things
i think the biggest revelation that i've
had is i think that our
understanding of mental illness and
mental
pressure is woefully outdated
what do you mean by that i'm curious
what you mean by that specifically
mental illness and mental pressure yeah
so like the first thing is that the
stresses that people go
under are changing that's why i call it
mental pressure because i don't think it
necessarily qualifies as illness
so um and i think that like there's a
big mistake that's being made in the
academic community
well a mistake is actually a little bit
unfair um there are some assumptions
which are being made so for example if
you look at the criteria for
proposed criteria for video game
addiction they're essentially
the same as alcohol addiction with the
world word alcohol replaced with video
games
yeah i think i saw similar with like
gambling addiction too basically yeah
and so what they do is they say that all
and that basically has the presumption
that all addictions are sort of the same
and it's been my experience that that is
really not true
having i mean so i'm an addiction
psychiatrist generally in my day job and
like
you know working with a heroin addict
and working with like a video game
addict
there's some overlap to be sure but they
feel like really discreet diseases with
different kinds of solutions
so that's one one thing so i think that
in general the kinds of pressures that
people face like when i talk to
streamers and stuff
is like very very different
in some ways so i think uh yeah go ahead
do you um so i'm kind of curious on that
road
um do you ever feel like
when you bring up even the concept of
being addicted to video games do you
ever feel like the pushback that you
might get from somebody in the gaming
community might be similar to an
alcoholic
like the denial that it could ever even
be a problem i noticed that sometimes
i remember when i i don't know if it was
a prose day of something or at the who
whoever initially came out with the
video game addiction thing i remember
when i first read it the language seemed
a little bit vague but it's like yeah i
could totally see people being addicted
to video games
but it seemed like gaming communities in
general were incredibly
hostile towards the even the notion that
video games could like lead to an
unhealthy addiction do you ever do you
ever see that pushback or
sure yeah i mean i i think some people
push back against the idea of the
diagnosis like that's an interesting
question right like what happens
so this is a discussion that i haven't
had much recently but
when in its early days um when healthy
gamer was like
a group of like 50 strong and we would
meet once a week and talk about video
game addiction
we would talk about what does it mean to
be labeled as an addict what are the
pros and what are the cons because there
are advantages and there are
disadvantages
so i think it's understandable that a
lot of the community so i think our
community is misunderstood
by society as a whole
when you say our community you mean
gaming or yeah you're okay yeah okay
twitch and i think what happens is that
like what we see
is so let's say like i'm a 16 year old
kid and i have conflict with my mom
and when when i see something about
video game addiction
it gives her license to continue
to it gives her ammo in our arguments
because she can just say i'm a [ __ ]
addict now it's a disease
the world health organization is
concerned about it so it actually gives
people like an avenue to invalidate like
gamers experiences
sure okay so diagnosis is supposed to
help us
get help for something basically if
you're gonna identify a problem well now
we can treat it but some people just use
it to like attack people basically
sure yeah okay and i think the bigger
problem that that happens is not so much
that they attack people but
there's an assumption of understanding
right so like your mom then thinks
she knows what's wrong with you and by
doing so it's not so much that she's
attacking you although she can
it's also that they don't like actually
listen to gamers perspectives
so the big thing that is absent in
all the discussions on video game
addiction are so speaking of suicidality
you know i'll get messages from people
that are like
you know i can't stop playing video
games i don't know what to do with my
life i'm stuck i'm 27 i live at home and
i want to kill myself
i also get messages that are you know
i'll be browsing reddit
i mean i don't get and i'll see these
stories of like you know if it wasn't
for you guys i would have killed myself
years ago
so i think video games in the gaming
community can be an
amazing source of support and growth
and it can be something that is like
toxic and harmful
and generally speaking you know you
don't really think about i mean you
can't actually but
um generally speaking we don't think
about like the the community of heroin
users
as like a place that can like support
and bolster each other when in reality
they do like that's why
n a and a are powerful organizations
sure um
but you know gaming i think is a little
bit different there's no there's no like
there's esports but there's no like
professional
heroine tournaments so i think that the
two are just different
sure and one last kind of new one saltos
out which is like a good example of why
i think that old patterns don't apply
is if there's a kid who spends you know
all day every day
practicing basketball and he's 16
then do you call him addicted
because he wants to make it in the nba
and when you've got a 16 year old who's
in the top .001 percent of a particular
sport and wants to go pro
and is failing out of his classes do you
call him addicted
so it's tricky
yeah for sure i think it's really
interesting um a lot of there's like two
different types of like movies
that show success in like sports or the
arts or whatever
um you have the like the the the very
happy upbeat sports movies that like
everybody's like super happy and super
awesome the entire time and they win the
championship and it's awesome and then
you have the others that show
basically like the level of
self-destruction that some people engage
in to reach that top
0.0001 percent where the difference
between it being pathologized or not is
whether or not they make it basically
yeah exactly right yeah so like i have
some clients who are let's say an
investment banking
been divorced three times have very high
net worths
devote themselves body mind and soul
to their profession and how is that
different from an esports professional
or someone who wants to make it in
esports no
so i think that our perceptions of
health
wellness and illness like need to be
re-examined that's another big thing
i've learned
is you know yeah go ahead um
sorry okay well it's if we're expanding
the conversation i have a lot of
just interesting general questions for
your perspective on what you just said
um so when it comes to things like
uh autism spectrum disorder or adhd
and the different subtypes whatever
how do you um let's say that there's
like a healthy
section of human mind that exists on a
spectrum of zero to one hundred
but let's say like in the society that
we live in today it seems like only like
20 to 80 work right and 0 to 20 is left
out 80 to 100 is left out
is there ever a worry that we just
pathologize those because they don't
work with current society
um rather than like having a more honest
look at whether or not these are like
unhealthy states of mind so i'm thinking
of something like specific to like adhd
or or autism spectrum disorder usually
the ones i hear people bring up the most
where these people aren't like
mentally ill or they don't have a
disease it's just with the way that
we've organized society today
their minds specifically have a hard
time adapting do you think is that ever
a big worry do you think in
psychology with how we approach that's
half of what i preach about ireland
so let me tell you the crops of the
problem uh destiny is that
we think about it as a bell curve with
one dimension
so like the whole thing about ayurveda
and this is i think a fundamental
problem with our understanding of
psychology
and medicine in general is what you
repeat that again the whole problem with
what what is that word you're using
i forget it's the bell curve yeah oh
yeah i'm sorry it's one dimensional
right so we think about human mind as
like
a function on one dimension but that's
not
how the mind works the mind is
multi-dimensional that's the first
problem
yeah so you have like a veda is the word
you use oh yeah ayurveda
what is that so ayurveda is traditional
indian medicine
okay and ayurveda posits that not so
this i know this is
to sound kind of weird but in western
medicine we posit that all minds are
basically the same
okay right so like you go to psychology
like you major in psychology and you
learn like
principles of the mind like if you
become a doctor you learn like
cardiac physiology right so which is
like all hearts
basically function in the same way and
even when we're taught about the mind we
sort of
learn that all minds basically function
in the same way we have a subconscious
we have a conscious we have an ego we
have an id we have a superego
these are all commonalities of all minds
and we sort of treat them all the same
ayurveda starts with the idea that not
all minds are the same and not all
people are the same
that people are unique and they actually
have three
axes of like
mind right and you can have scores on
each of those axes
and depending on what your scores are on
each of these three axes you get sort of
a unique mind
and i'll give you just an example so
what we call
adhd is people who have high vata so i'm
someone who has a high vata
okay so vata is the sunscript word which
sort of means wind and ether
so my mind is like the wind an ayurvedic
doctor once explained this to me so
actually i'll tell you the story can i
go off on tangent this is what mata's
doing
if you want yeah we go we go off on
tangents okay so
i was using your diagnosis as an excuse
for your responsible behavior but
absolutely absolutely so i use it i use
it as an excuse for my irresponsible
behavior
and i also use it as a key reason for
why i believe i'm successful
it's both okay hit me up with this um so
i was so i finished call uh high school
went to college started failing out got
super excited
so i like ran for student government i
joined a bunch of clubs
i went to a bunch of parties i studied
three languages
in my first year in college because i
got really excited about
a bunch of [ __ ] i was pre-med i took
philosophy courses like i was all over
the place
tried to join a fraternity and you know
fail like god less
like got mostly d's and f's maybe a c or
a b here or there
and then second year um what happened is
like
i tried to cut down so like i cut down
in my second semester cut down and
first semester of sophomore year cut
down cut down cut down and then even
like i was taking like three classes
which is half a normal mode and then was
not doing any
extracurriculars was doing nothing just
taking i was like a half-time student
and
nothing else and i still did bad and i
went to india
and um one of my one of my teachers
there i was kind of telling him i was
like i don't know why i'm like
why i suck at life like at first i was
doing too many things and i understood
that and my dad was like you gotta focus
you gotta focus
you gotta focus so i started doing fewer
things and i started doing fewer things
and i started doing fewer things
and despite like doing less stuff i
still continued to fail at basically the
same rate i was just [ __ ] confused
and he was like yeah that sounds like a
terrible idea and i was like what do you
mean it's a terrible idea
he's like your mind is so dynamic
that if you're gonna get bored easily
and what you need to do is juggle as
many balls as you can at the same time
without dropping a single one
and that your mind is designed to like
do something really really
passionately for a brief period of time
and then switch to something else
and actually your best productivity is
not going to come
from one thing it's going to come from
like rotating your attention between
like three or four different things
so when i get bored of one thing i move
to another and i
get bored of that i move to that this is
the key thing that i didn't understand
is that i used to just keep on shifting
a to z
and the one change that i made is i just
circled between a and d
and then i circled back to a and that's
when i started becoming like successful
but my mind is is different it's about
the mind
and different kinds of minds need
different sorts of strategies
and adhd is a good example of like what
i call
you know there another dichotomy is like
there are hunters and there are farmers
like if you look at human psychology
some people excel at waking up the same
time
every day and doing the same thing every
day and they find a lot of pleasure
enjoyment satisfaction and ease and like
putting all their energy into one thing
those are farmers and there are hunters
who are there our brains are actually
designed to like
to pull in a lot of disparate stimuli
and like piece things together
we have to be dynamic it's absolutely
adaptive
and add i think is a good example of
some kinds of minds that are not ideally
designed which i think is what your
question was
for things like sitting in a classroom
for eight hours
that's not what we're made for and so we
get
diagnosed with something because
you know it's like our mind is not
designed to function that way
sure was that too much
no it's interesting it's something that
uh my son is
really really really bad adhd um and
that's kind of uh because i did like so
much reading on it i think i might even
actually after doing so much research on
it
um but yeah it's one of the things that
i kind of wonder is like um
we're quick to pathologize behaviors
that just don't fit into society
yeah it's it's very hard when i talk
publicly about anything related to like
psychology or
mental illness you have to walk a very
careful line between saying like yeah
these are some concerns versus
invalidating the whole field
and like discouraging people from like
seeking treatment or talking to
professionals is really hard
conversation i have sometimes
um yeah some people will take like if
you say like oh yeah we pathologize too
much
some people are liable to take that and
go ah yeah i knew it like it's all quack
science it's all [ __ ] like i'm not
gonna go talk to anybody like i don't
need a pill or whatever and then they
just you know walk away from everything
which is really
um which is really bad i think yeah yeah
i mean i think there's some interesting
data to support so i think adhd is a
real thing for sure
and also i think it's probably like way
over diagnosed
so there's data that suggests that uh
student-to-teacher ratio has a core a
pretty tight correlation
with diagnosis of adhd can you predict
what would be your guess as to what as
student
as the number of students per teacher
goes up
what happens to adhd diagnosis diagnosis
would probably increase
absolutely and that's what you find why
do you think that is yeah
you have less time to spend per child um
so your
band of acceptable attention decreases
and decreases the more children you have
the more narrow their focus needs to be
because the less time you can commit to
them so the higher likelihood that their
behavior is pathologized and diagnosed
adhd probably
exactly what the data shows
um okay something else you brought up um
if you ever want to go off on any of
these two just get because i'm just
asking questions
um a lot of streamers have a problem
where
you get a message well i say a problem
that's a really rude way to say you get
a lot of messages sometimes people say
like hey
like i'm suicidal um i don't really know
what to do i don't expect you to respond
but i just want to let you know my
thoughts
um what do you think is a responsible
course of action for
i i guess like streamers there in that
yeah
yeah what is the responsible course of
action that for any streamer that gets
a message like that i mean so i i think
you should urge him to get help
right so like like i i mean it's cool so
i
you know many things i've learned
destiny since i started streaming on
twitch one is like how awesome of a
community this is in general
and how tight the bonds are between a
streamer
and the audience which is really cool i
mean i think it's actually
i was talking about this i think maybe
on that podcast that i think it's kind
of neat because
you know we're facing a lot of societal
pressures in terms of mental health
and i think that that you know the very
things that on the one hand are toxic
are also the things that i hope to be
our salvation
and like social media i think is a good
example of something that can be
very harmful and also be like incredibly
helpful
um in terms of what to do for a person
who reaches out like
i think that you know it's hard because
what do you have the bandwidth for
and what do you have the competence for
and so i i think it's important you know
if if
as if someone you know reached out to
you and said
hey um i have blood in my stool
for the last two months like what do you
think your responsibility is
as a streamer
um we tell them to see a doctor yeah so
i think it's the same
right so i i think that like i was
saying earlier so i think we treat
physical and mental illnesses still
differently
and i think that that person deserves
the possibility of treatment if they do
have an illness
and if not even if they don't have an
illness and they're like half the people
that i see that are not
suicidal i think those people can be
helped
uh you know i think you just have to
decide
in terms of your own personal bandwidth
and what you feel comfortable with how
much of a conversation to engage with
them
i think that the tricky thing there is
that sometimes
you know if you really don't have i
think it can be unfair to people
yeah i mean i think you have to be
careful about because we think about
this a lot on stream like when someone
comes on stream like what's our ongoing
responsibility to them
so i think it can be you know you should
do what you can
and then also if you can't do the second
step
give people direction as to how to do it
right like if you're a taxi driver and
you take someone to a railway station or
something
and you drop them off and then you're
like oh yeah so like
your terminal is this way like at least
point them in the right direction
sure okay what are you doing you ever
um how do you respond to those requests
uh oh i mean i and yeah i usually
because i get
enough of it to where i'm basically my
response is um listen i understand
you're going through some things
um unfortunately i don't have enough
information to help you and i don't
think i would even have the time to give
you the proper attention you need i
highly recommend talking to either
school resources or psychology something
basically something like that yeah
how does that feel to do uh
i i'm sorry i mean personally it's not i
don't i don't think about it much but i
know that a lot of other streamers have
like really big problems with that sorry
that sounds really cool to say but i
don't think i have like obligations to
strangers that email me or whatever
um i don't mean that to sound that cold
but yeah i i don't personally think
about it much but i know that a lot of
streamers have a lot of big problems
where
when they get messages like that they
feel like they all of a sudden have like
an obligation to a stranger to ensure
that
they have a positive outcome with their
issues and yeah
yeah do you ever worry about um well you
you just you use that phrase what is our
responsibility do you ever worry about
people that you bring on seeing this as
a sort of replacement for therapy
sure i know that yeah yeah i mean i
think that's why we try to
you know be clear with people before
they come on
um and i don't i don't mean just from
like a medical legal perspective like we
genuinely try to you know make it clear
to people
we try to equip people with further
resources if they're interested
like if they want to explore things i'll
oftentimes tell them that you know i
think you should continue working on
this with a therapist
um and generally speaking you know
sometimes people have misunderstood
and and so we have clarifying
conversations and we try to behave
sort of in the best and most ethical
manner possible
i tend to be kind of a stickler for like
boundaries and ethics and stuff i think
it's a really fascinating field
especially in mental health
um so we try to really do well as an
organization to like really help them
and yeah it's just sort of a
case-by-case basis though
i mean we have sort of a set of
resources and stuff that we provide to
people but
sure okay cool uh when it comes to
looking at
mental health in the west it feels like
we talk a lot about body health
but it seems like we spend basically no
time
at least through all of schooling
talking about um
talking about not not just not being
mentally ill but being mentally like
very healthy it seems like we don't
value
um the pursuit of happiness very much uh
in the western world
um i know a lot of people and i'm sure
you've met a lot of people in the
streaming world or in the work world
who their lives kind of revolve around
the acquisition of
bigger houses higher paying jobs
maybe different items or possessions how
what kind of conversation do you have
with somebody to start to get them down
the track of thinking that they should
prioritize for things that give them
like more sustained or longer-term
happiness
than just kind of like getting stuck in
like the race of trying to get more and
more stuff or like higher wage
does that question make sense yeah so i
think
so i mean how do you deviate people from
being materialistically oriented
yeah i guess this is like i feel this is
being like one of the biggest problems
that i think that most people that i
talk to
face is that we have like no concept of
like
when we think of like progress of
society or lives nobody ever thinks like
man you know when i was 20
i could have like three close friends
now that i'm 35 i can have like 15 close
friends like nobody it seems like nobody
would ever say something like that and
view it as progress but rather when i
was 20 i was making 45 a year now that
i'm 35 i'm making 120
like that's the progress of people
thinking what how do you talk to
somebody or
how do you begin to set somebody on the
path of not viewing life like that
it's a really hard one sorry no i think
it's i mean that's a lot of my day job
so
let me start by saying you know you had
us some context at the beginning so let
me start with that context
sure so i don't i would disagree that we
don't think about happiness it's just
the way we think about happiness in the
way that we're taught to think about
happiness is materialistic
so these are cultural values right so
like when you
like when you meet like a kid who's like
the first question that people ask is
what do you want to be when you grow up
you grow up yeah
so right right then and there a whole
society is teaching an individual that
your identity is based on your
profession
so why would that individual not orient
towards a profession first and foremost
what are the things that we celebrate oh
like getting into harvard like
getting a promotion getting a raise
these are the things the society that we
celebrate we don't advertise
hey i made a friend today you know it's
like
okay like the [ __ ] is wrong with you
where you have to like advertise making
a friend
so our value system is i mean we just
think that something leads to happiness
and you know that too i don't think is
entirely unfair because
you know i'm a second generation indian
where
you know my parents like happiness like
sort of spiritual fulfillment was like
really not
a thing that anyone had the luxury for
because
you know my dad grew up in a house that
had like eight people
living in a 10 by 10 space
so it's really about you know like
making ends meet like my grandfather was
like heavily in debt
my parents like borrowed money for a
plane ticket
and suitcases when they came to this
country and so i think a lot of that is
kind of
you know it's i don't really blame the
society for what it is but i think your
question is a good one
which actually kind of comes back to uh
you know how do you reorient people so i
do reorder people because
most of my at least until about you know
i started doing healthy gamer more you
know most of my
patients or clients would be successful
like professionally successful people
who are unhappy
that was sort of what i was good at and
what i tell them is that you know this
is actually the same problem that would
have faced
so and this is kind of subtle but so you
know buddha had everything so
he was a prince and he was loved
and had wealth and power and respect and
then one day he woke up and he was
unhappy
and then he was like i don't understand
like why i'm unhappy
and something very subtle happens so
this is another thing that happens we
tend to do a lot of gatekeeping around
suffering
so we don't let people who are
successful suffer
we blame them for suffering and we say
that you shouldn't suffer
because you have money or success or
whatever
another common thing that's a big thing
yeah i bring this up
a lot around streamers is that like if
you're a streamer you can't ever really
complain about anything related to your
job publicly because you sound so
unbelievably entitled like oh boohoo
you're getting
hate because you're famous wow oh my god
it's like people
generally in the public perceive it that
way yeah yeah so i mean i think the
basic question is
what do you think is the source of
suffering and does money buy happiness
and money does correlate with happiness
to a certain degree
right it certainly provides security but
they're really really
yeah so the really fascinating thing
though is if you look at buddha
so like here here's what happens like so
i think basically
you know how you talk to them is they
need spirituality and i'll talk about
what
i mean by that so if you think about it
let's say i make 30k a year
and i don't i've never dated anyone in
my life and i'm unhappy
so when i look at my life i think okay
in order to be happy i need a girlfriend
so let's say i get a girlfriend and my
happiness increases some then i'm like
okay now i want more money and so you
make more money and then happiness
increases some because it does right
you get to travel and like oh i've got
to go to hawaii because now i'm making
50k instead of 30k and i can afford to
make a vacation
sure and so what happened with buddha is
like
he checked all those boxes and as long
as you have a box unchecked
you think that checking those boxes is
going to lead to happiness
which is not an unreasonable way to
think but what happened with wood does
he gets to the end of the road and he's
checked all the boxes and then he wakes
up and he's happy
and then he's screwed because then what
does he do
and so this is where like when you know
when i work with people who are
materialistic
or materialistically successful and
unhappy i basically tell them
now you're on with this path and there's
a saying sort of in the meditation
community that you can't meditate on an
empty stomach
you can also see this uh you know shades
of this and maslow's hierarchy of needs
where he says
self-actualization is at the top right
you have to take care of
the conditions to pursue happiness not
happiness itself yeah
yeah and i think from uh from a more
psychological or spiritual aspect
there is this idea because we're you
know our brains
tell us that external stuff will lead to
satisfaction
and once you satisfy yourself externally
that's really when you have the
desperation
that is really required for true
spirituality
like people talk about spirituality like
it's a good thing
but in my experience spiritual true
spirituality is born
of like abject desperation and terror
okay it's when nothing else in the world
will work for you
you only have one option left and that's
really what it takes
gotcha i don't know how common it is
among immigrant families in the united
states but in my personal experience
sometimes the new immigrants to the us
are some of the most
like ultra liberal very patriotic very
individualized people
and i noticed that for my my family on
my mom's side
is all cuban and they are obsessed
my like my mom and her siblings are
obsessed with
acquisition of material wealth so like
they have huge houses
but like they all work multiple jobs
they're like even with their full
retirements and pensions where they're
trying to like keep up their payments or
whatever
um and it just seems pretty miserable
and then i think back to um i have older
cuban family that live down in miami in
a place called hialeah
very trashy cockroaches everywhere water
is like flooding the apartment every
single time it rains horrible place
but when i would spend the summer there
almost every other day there were like
these huge cookouts where like everybody
was going everybody's laughing
everybody's having a good time
and even though they were completely
missing that material level of well it
seemed like they were all like super
friendly
really happy like really chill with
everybody um
and then watching the that dichotomy
between like the ultra wealthy super
liberal individualistic american
um that you know has the big house and
the dream cars or whatever versus like
the very poor people it seems strange to
think that like
that my older family just seemed to be
more happy in general i guess
when they weren't like running that yeah
it's been impossible to talk
or what how do you understand that
um how do i understand it and like why
do i think what drives each
person to do i mean how do you
understand that phenomenon
um um
broader there's a broader philosophical
i guess understanding it feels like
it feels like the in the western world
in general it feels like we very much
fixate on possession
and money um so a lot of parents when
they talk about
um i want to have i want my child to
have a better life than me
most of the time what that translates to
is i want my child to have a better job
and make more money than me
and i feel like my my mom's parents were
very much like
we came from cuba to the united states
to give our children better lives and
they all you know my mom joined the air
force my aunt was in the nypd
like people got jobs and they got money
but they never maybe they just assumed
that like those values of like friends
and family would filter down
automatically but they didn't actually
deliberately instill them
so my parents got the whole like yeah
like you guys can do better than us you
can be successful you can have good jobs
and make a lot of money
but they didn't actually stress those i
guess like friendship values of the
relationships you could form with other
people
and those didn't filter down as much
that would be like my assumption i guess
why don't you think they filter down as
much
why don't they filter down um
i think maybe there are some things that
filter down
unconsciously and other things require
some deliberate level
of filtering down so for instance like
if you're abusive to your children
that type of modeling might filter down
automatically um but if you have some
value of i guess in this case of like
forming friendships with other people if
that's not as visible to your children
maybe they take it for granted or it
doesn't filter down as much maybe
there's some things that filter
automatically
some things that don't i'm not sure yeah
they're gonna guess yeah
i mean i i think that you know for a lot
of it so
so i mean i agree with you in terms of
some stuff is it what's
be filtered down but i think that you
know generally speaking
i almost think about it like darwin's
finches so there's a particular mindset
that is adaptive
for a particular circumstance and
you know i know at least in my parents
circumstance like friendships were not
as important
as like paying off the crushing debt of
your family
yeah and so they oriented towards like
materialistic
success which is i mean i consider
myself to be quite lucky because
i think they also instilled in me they
weren't materialistic they were very
successful
but i remember you know being 16 years
old and then like
you know my parents asked me they're
like do you you know what kind of car do
you want
it's like i've had a car and i was like
i don't need one
and because i had friends i was younger
i started school earlier skip to grade
or whatever
and so my friends drove so like a year
before you know i would always get rides
and like i didn't
i didn't even get a driver's license
until i was 18. which on the one hand is
like super entitled and privileged and
on the other hand is also like quite
unmaterialistic it's kind of weird right
it's sort of like both
sure whereas well it depends on where
you live but i understand what you mean
yeah yeah
it's kind of like my my friends were
really shocked that
i had the option of having a car and i
chose not to take it
which is like the depth of materialistic
you know but it was also like my parents
also instilled in the values that
stuff doesn't bring happiness and so
that's really good yeah
i'm lucky that way um the thing you
brought up early about jobs is really
interesting when you act like
there's a weird transition that happens
at some point i think maybe in high
school where
when you ask a kid when he's a child
what do you want to be when you grow up
it's actually it seems like a really
positive experience looking forward to
because i want to be like an astronaut
or a firefighter like these are like
what are your passions
and then by the time they hit like maybe
it's like 14 50 when you get to high
school
now it's like what kind of job do you
want to have when you graduate college
it's a much much different question that
it's like you're reframing something
earlier in a
more negative light at the same time
yeah yeah so i mean i
the reason that i was pre-med in college
is because when i told my
parents friends when i was 17 years old
at a christmas party
that i want to be a doctor one day
they like thought i was the hottest
hottest [ __ ] in the world they were like
wow
and then i was like i felt really good
right i was like i'm gonna be a doctor
one day
and so i you know you start to develop
this professional based ego
and it's like the absolute worst reason
to become a doctor
that's why half of the indian kids that
i know become doctors
and it's but i mean i don't blame people
for doing that i think it's like
you know we we pass on to our kids the
formula for success that
we think is important so in your in our
case
you know we may emphasize friendships
and happiness to the detriment
of professional success
which i think is okay
but i guess it would depend on the
person you talked to i think most people
would think it's okay if they'd
experience both ends of it but
yeah yeah right so our parents also
thought it was
okay to sacrifice friendships for the
sake of professional
security right that's why they did it
have you ever seen on the internet um
the the kind of
hyper obsession with stem and the kind
of relentless [ __ ] on
like the arts and humanities and stuff
yeah
i mean i work i don't know if you're
familiar with some of these prep schools
but i have i've had patients or clients
at these prep schools and it's like one
of the biggest crises of confidence
for a 15 or 16 year old girl
at a place like phillips exeter is
discovering that they don't want to do
stem
it's so hard because they've been taught
oh like there need to be more women in
medicine and women in engineering and
they want to be like astrophysicists and
there's almost this like bizarre
pressure that's placed upon them that
because it's a male-dominated field they
should seek to like even that out
whereas like really they just
sometimes they just don't want to do
that and i absolutely see that pressure
i think some of it's fair
in terms of like discrimination and
stuff like that but
can't swing too far in the other
direction you know yeah
i think those fields are overvalued in
general so like those are the
this is the feeling like if you're a you
know second generation immigrant
when i was growing up yeah i had a
couple of options
my dad said to us once
one of y'all is going to be a doctor and
one of y'all is going to be a lawyer i
have an elder brother
and what i used to say in my med school
interviews when they were like why do
you want to become a doctor i said well
when i was growing up my dad said one of
y'all is going to be a doctor and one of
y'all is going to be a lawyer
my brother was older and he chose law
schools that's why i'm here
what do you think um do you think you
just got lucky then or do you think that
you learned to like
accept your profession or why do you
think you ended up enjoying what you
thought i assume you joey do you see i
love what i do
uh so i mean i i think so my story is
kind of interesting so i started out
pre-med but i really
wasn't really interested in being a
doctor
i actually became interested in being a
doctor about four
years a couple years after truly became
interested in being a doctor
about two or three years after i
finished college
and what i realized it was actually part
of more my spiritual
path more than anything else and then
now i think a lot about karma and things
like that and i think i'm supposed to be
a doctor but
um you know for me the decision really
changed when
my so i tried to become a monk so i
tried to
like give up my material life and my
teachers said
you're welcome to do that but you have
to get a doctoral degree and you
you have to make that choice when you're
30. which is really smart of them
because at the age of 21 i wasn't really
giving up anything i had nothing worth
giving up
if you really want to become a monk you
have to give [ __ ] up and that means
building [ __ ] and then walking away
right and this is what i see a lot in
like also sort of these like
pseudo-spiritual people who are like
like myself 21 anti-establishment
believe that the capitalist world is
terrible and they don't want to
participate in it
and that they're going to devote
themselves to spirituality and they're
not like really giving up anything
they're just saying no to the system
because they don't want to play that
game
yeah and so my teachers are like you
know go complete your education and
one of my teachers was a neuroscientist
a phd in neuroscience another one had a
phd in quantum physics
and these were like the two monks
basically that i learned a lot from or
i've had a couple of other people but
um and they said you know go finish your
education and then
if you're interested in your 30 we'll
take you one of my other teachers said
if you can't actually like succeed in
the material world you're not going to
succeed in the spiritual world because
materialistic success is easier than
spiritual success
and so then i was like okay i'm going to
just pick something arbitrary i might as
well become a doctor
at the least i'll understand about like
the physical body which i think will
will help me when i become a monk
so i decided okay i just said it almost
arbitrarily i was like i'm just gonna
become a doctor because that's what i'm
gonna do
after i finish medical school and stuff
like that i'm going to walk away and i'm
going to go be a monk
and that's really when i decided to
become a doctor and gave my all
got you i don't know do you have a
question
yeah no yeah i think it makes sense um
it seems like you you had you
um i think this sometimes it seems like
sometimes we get really really lucky
that we stumble into certain people in
our lives rather than somebody that
could have
um i guess put you down another path
i i don't know too much about people um
in this world of spirituality but it
seems like it's possible that you could
have wound up with somebody that would
have just encouraged you
wholeheartedly to drop school and just
to pursue the giving up everything
lifestyle and that would have turned out
not as good for you it seems
yeah so i mean there were people who
encouraged me
for that there were people who
encouraged me so i applied to medical
school for three years because it's hard
to get into med school with a 2.5 gpa
and i i got like what i think at the end
of two years i had gotten 90 rejections
and you know even people who are really
close to me advised for me other paths
they're like hey man
you maybe want to think about doing
something else
and that's why i say like that's when i
really decided to become a doctor
because it it was a bad idea to continue
like objectively it was bad
um and i had other options like i could
have gone to the caribbean and places
like that but i was like unless i can
succeed at this i'm not gonna succeed a
vegan monk so i'm gonna
keep going to hell with the audience
okay
now when you do your or go ahead yeah go
ahead
i mean you had asked i think i i
you brought up this point about like you
know you're kind of lucky that there are
some people in your life and i
completely agree and i think a lot about
dharma
or karma which is something that i've
really come to appreciate and respect
more and more
so i don't really think about it as luck
but okay
um oh okay hold on because i have a i
have a
i have one question in terms of like um
i wanted to toss that out just for you
yeah good yeah because i want to hook
onto that um yeah i have a question
about like um
how how do you decide what level of
spirituality to incorporate in your
conversations with people such that you
feel like it won't turn them off from
the conversation
you feel like it's a that's like a
that's a that's a secondary question but
now you brought up the karma thing
um so personally for me i try to avoid
any idea of like um
of like deserved circumstances
um because i worry that it leads people
down this road
of thinking so for instance if you bring
up a concept of karma
and you had a few awesome mentors um and
you you know well that's the universe
you know working as it's intended to
um what do you say then to like people
that are that never found those figures
in life like you ever worry that they
might take that it's like oh man i guess
i either messed up hard in a previous
life or i just did something bad in my
youth to not earn
i guess that mentor like karma didn't
pay off for me because i you know i'm a
failure
how do you how do you balance that out
or yeah how do you address yeah that's a
great question
and it's hard so this is a long
conversation if you'll
permit me yeah of course so when i was
when i was
studying in india you know i was
learning about all the stuff
and karma was something that i sort of
had like i didn't believe in like
destiny
or fate or any of that stuff i'm very
scientific like i'm very skeptical
so people would sort of talk about it i
was like and it just seems like
randomness to me
and that that the that sentiment was
even reinforced by like people that i
would talk to right so i was somewhat
skeptical so i'd go to like different
monks and different people who were
studying and i'd talk to them and be
like you know what do you think about
karma
and the most telling thing that made me
feel like karma's complete [ __ ] is
one person i talked to
was like don't tell anyone this but and
this was a monk who was like i don't
believe in karma i think it's [ __ ]
and i was like why do you say that he
says i have trouble accepting
any system in which
if someone gets raped it's their fault
yeah
or starving children or cancer when
you're 25 or anything
and i was like that's a damn good point
so like i was like
okay karma's out the window and it was
for like a decade for me because i
never saw i could never resolve that
like why do
bad things happen to good people and
people use karma as an explanation
and that i think is done i think it's
absolutely done
and then i don't know when this happened
but at some point like something clicked
probably through meditation so i think
this also gets into
like where knowledge comes from so i'd
say that a lot of my
understanding of karma doesn't come from
logic because i think that that stance
logically is indefensible and i don't
accept it like i'm not willing to
believe in any system that says that if
something bad
bad happens to you it's your fault um
which there's problems with that too
but so i think that from a very good i
mean you make a really strong point that
people sort of
say that i'm screwed because of my karma
which is what a lot of people in india
do
and like indians and hindus and i find
that to be
[ __ ] i think it's like it's a very
easy way
to absolve yourself of all
responsibility because it's sort of
karma
gets equated as destiny or fate right
but that's really not what karma is and
if you really stop and think about it
like here's my understanding of karma
it's nothing but newton's
third law second law every action has an
equal and opposite reaction it's not a
principle of
destiny or fate it's a principle of
science so the people who developed the
theory of karma
noticed that all actions have reactions
right like if i drop a ball it falls and
so then they started asking themselves a
really interesting question which is
like
where does that principle stop working
right so for earlier today we were
talking about
why the values that we got instilled and
why there are different groups of people
and we came up with explanatory causes
for the effects that we see
materialistic family
fun loving family and we said that this
has a cause
does that make sense yeah of course yeah
i understand where we're going
right so like physics is like a very
clear cause
and then we get to these things like
psychology which is like ah
and then we get to [ __ ] like behavioral
economics
which is like is there a cause and
effect there
and generally speaking i think the
answer is yes
of course yeah there has to be right
everything is causal if we believe
ah but hold on a second so that's a very
bold claim right because if you say that
everything is causal
do you really mean everything is cause i
do i'm a heart determinist yeah
i do believe everything so does that
mean that you were born to your
particular parents
is that the effect of a cause yep
what's the cause um
the the causes of them having sex okay
right so so do you bel so that that's
that explains the actual biological
birth
what do you think about like your sense
of identity or personality is that also
just purely based on
the biology of your brain yeah your
conscious mind is an emergent property
of the underlying
neurochemistry or whatever of the brain
yeah so that's where i disagree
right so i i think that like in my
experience
so this is the way that i think about
people's lives so like
i think about let's say let's say i have
a fence
and i'm standing on one side of the
fence and i see a ball
come over the fence and all i have is is
its downward trajectory
all that is observable and
scientifically verifiable
is the downward trajectory can i
know where that ball came from
um it depends on how deep you're asking
this question i mean the ball could have
come from a whole other dimension yeah i
mean
we don't know just to come over the
fence i mean the snapshot would be it
came from the next the neighbor's yard
right yep and
where in the neighbor's yard could i
calculate its point of origin
i mean assuming you had perfect data
about the way that the ball was falling
the arc of the angle and everything yes
you could yeah
even though i have no scientifically
verifiable
or empirical observation about its
origin
i'm hesitant to concede that i mean i
would argue that if you have the
trajectory
but that's all we have right all we have
is the effect we don't have the cause
well but if if we understand the
university causal then we would know
that that one effect could only be
preceded by one particular thing it
would necessitate an
origin right it must have been launched
at a particular um
speed and angle right yep right so i
think this is where
now the question becomes in terms of
your experience as a conscious being
is so like that's an effect we both
agree there the question is what is the
cause
is it simply neurons in consciousness
and so then the question is like do you
think that
your parents meeting was
also like was it random that they met or
was there
what was their relationship the effect
of a prior cause
um everything is the effect of a prior
cause basically that's what i would say
right right so so then we could assume
therefore that your consciousness and
personality
is the downstream effect of causes that
happened before
you were even born correct the beginning
of the universe yeah
right so the big difference between
karma and science is karma presupposes
that some of the things about your life
today were determined by things that you
were
that happened before you were born
and science so far generally says no
right
science says that wait science says know
that things that are happening in your
life today aren't due to things that
happened before you were born
not generally right so if you look at
like psychology or behavioral economics
people don't think about causal factors
before you were born
in the application of our scientific
understanding of an individual human
being
is that really true though so like for
instance like for psychology
um if we look at things like or genetics
right if you like things like heredity
we can talk about the heritability of
even political beliefs right
beautifully like right so now this is
interesting so like let's look at what
traditionally karma has said and what
science says now because i think
genetics
is the first scientific evidence of the
theory of karma
because just think about this we
generally say that your life is like
you know determined by like stuff now
and is not
influenced by things from the past
that's how we look at our lives
and genetics is the first scientific so
think put yourself 200 years ago
right so we can't think about ourselves
now and what if i told you that like
who you are today is determined by
things before you were being
i mean i would fully agree with that i
feel like i feel like the scientific
evidence though tends to take that point
of view that who you are today is
usually an amalgamation of stuff that
happened prior to your birth
so for instance are you born to a
single-parent household what what is the
socio-economic status of your family in
the united states like i would view
those factors as being like majorly
important in the formation of this
person
yeah yeah so so we are today but what
i'm saying is like put yourself 200
years ago before we had the discovery of
genetics because like
generally speaking science says like
here is the now and the past
tends to be filled with randomness and
may not be like associated with the now
i mean i don't agree with that obviously
but i mean i i don't i mean the true
sense science doesn't say that right
because we have big bang theory and we
have gravity and all this kind of stuff
but if you look at the application of
science and the theory of karma all of
the theory of karma says is that
there's stuff in prior to this birth
that affects you in this birth
and that's the idea of reincarnation
that you carry karma from your past life
and stuff like that
all it's saying is that there's stuff
that's happened in the past which sounds
radical if i were to tell you that
destiny things from your past life
affect for example the fact that nathan
is your son
what would you see um well now i guess
it's getting into what do we consider
past life right now so what do you mean
by that what
prior causes are we talking about
exactly right so this is
this is where the border so karma used
to be like super crazy
and the more that we learn in science so
this is the way that i kind of think
about it there's like order in the
universe and there's chaos
and like a thousand or two thousand
years ago most of the universe was chaos
and very little of it was order
the reason that lightning happened was
because of zeus there's a whimsical god
in the sky who sometimes gets pissed off
and throws lightning bolts at the ground
and then as our scientific increasing is
understanding
is grown we've demystified a lot of
stuff and we added order into our
universe
so at some point the question is this
kind of comes back to i'm lucky that
there were certain influences in my life
is there order to me meeting the people
that i met
is there an explanatory reason that we
can deduce for
why those people are in my life and
other people don't have those people
that was your original question what do
you think
yes of course right so that's karma
okay so my so the original contention
the original problem that i have is that
my problem with karma is that usually
now maybe
maybe it's possible you don't view it
this way which is good if you don't
but the problem that i have with this is
that karma often carries with it
this idea of moral weight uh it's wrong
what absolutely wrong yeah yeah i
understand that but i'm saying that to
99 of people without your explanation
karma to them will have a moral weight
so for instance like a wealthy person
will see a poor
person and think well that's karma you
know they earned their place in life and
i earned my place in life
rather than viewing karma as like a
billion antecedent causes that
eventually led down to a chain of
whatever they are today i i think i
think i must right i must
subscribe to your idea of karma given
the way you've explained it it just
feels like a lot of people view karma a
lot differently than what your
explanation would have yeah so i mean i
tend to be somewhat arrogant
but i think those people are wrong sure
right so i i think that karma is not and
this is what i've like
learned through meditation so i think my
understanding of karma
doesn't come from like logic or reading
it comes from meditation
and it comes from the realization that
karma in its essence
is no different from i keep on
forgetting
which of newton's laws it is but that
that you know every action has an equal
and opposite reaction
and that it's just the fundamental
principle of cause and effect that's
what karma is it's nothing more
nothing less the only thing the only
reason it sounds wild is because it
presumes that some of the effects in
this life come from things that are not
observable
by this person in his current state of
consciousness
gotcha okay but it has no moral so this
is the other confusing thing so karma
doesn't truly have morality
we're the ones who so what karma says is
this is also
not a great way of putting it but let's
just concede it for a second what goes
around comes around
and so the reason that something bad
happened to you is because you did
something bad
we're the ones that place the value
judge right if i
if i like hit myself in the face with
a tennis racket i'm the one who says
that that's a bad thing because i place
the value judgment
all karma says is that if you do a then
b will happen
it's just cause and effect we're the
ones who place the morality on top of it
the theory of karma has nothing to do
with morality
it just says you reap what you sow yeah
i understand that as
people though humans moralize everything
so it's
yeah this can be kind of hard to address
a concept like that i guess like an
immoral vacuum or whatever because it
seems like people are very quick to
moralize
everything literally it's a frustration
that i have i guess yes
um i'm quick to moralize as well and
that's dharma
dharma okay right so taraba and karma
are linked
but karma isn't has nothing to do with
morality dharma absolutely does
gotcha okay um
i don't know how much time you have so
just tell me you need to
take off okay um how do you decide
to uh how do you decide what level of
spirituality to incorporate
in your discussions with people or i
imagine there must have been some point
in your life
um when you were either in school or
when you first started practicing when
you were like
i'm going to be this spiritual or i'm
not going to bring this up at all or
what like how what was that thought
process like
yeah so it's evolved over time so it
starts with when i was applying to
medical school
and having someone who is writing me a
letter of recommendation strategize with
me about how much to talk about
complementing alternative medicine
so like we don't know how much we want
you to talk about yoga because like if
you talk about yoga and ayurveda
like they may not like that because they
look they're gonna think you're like
hokey
sure and so i talked about it less
and then after you know my third year
that i applied
i was like you know what this is just
who i am it's a big part of
who i am so i'm going to talk about it
and if they like it that's great i don't
want to wind up at a medical school
where i have to like hide part of who i
am
so that was like kind of the first step
and then at that point i think
complementing alternative medicine was
becoming like more evidence-based so
this was back in
2008 2009-ish
and and so by then like you know people
like there were yoga studios cropping up
people were really starting to do
research um
and uh so that was kind of the first
because i think complementary
alternative medicine and spirituality in
some ways go hand in hand
um and then during residency
so then you know when i was applying
after
medical school i focused on
evidence-based complementary and
alternative medicine because i still
tend to be like
pretty scientific and evidence-based i'm
not like a hokey
you know yoga hippie kind of dude like i
do yoga
in a more rigorous scientific and
calculated way
um and then
then in residency it was interesting
because i sort of basically didn't do
much of it
and there were i had a couple of
experiences where i was like sort of
testing the waters
so i was being taught therapy and one of
my
so i started to like spread my wings a
little bit and incorporate some eastern
philosophy
meditation some of these concepts like
karma not karma because that's like
really unscientific
but i started to spread my wings a
little bit and then actually found that
um you know got some negative pushback
from some people so one of my therapy
supervisors so when you're training to
become a psychiatrist
you have supervisors who like supervise
you in therapy so i go and i do therapy
with my patients
and then you go and you talk to your
therapy supervisor and sometimes they
sit in and they watch you do therapy
so one of my therapy supervisors said
i don't know if i can supervise you
because i don't know what you're doing
but it's not therapy
and i was kind of taken aback and i was
like i'm not sure what you mean and then
she was saying like yeah like you're
doing something
but it's not therapy like you're it
seems helpful so i'm not saying it's bad
it's just not therapy and so i talked to
my
program and stuff about that and they
were like thankfully they were pretty
supportive and they're like yeah
so this is i think the first time that
i've ever heard of this happening where
sometimes
you know residents will complain about
their supervisors that happens all the
time
because we tend to be like a fickle and
[ __ ] little bunch
but it's rare that like you know it's
it's common that you'll have
students complain to a teacher
i mean complain about teachers it's very
rare to have a teacher well maybe not
that rare but you know it's less common
for a
a teacher to say i can't have this
student in my class anymore
especially when you're like a resident
so it's not like you know kids with
behavioral problems when they're eight
but we tend to be like well-functioning
human beings and so thankfully my
program found me sort of a different
supervisor who was more comfortable with
me kind of doing my own thing
and then over time i sort of dabbled
into the waters and what i tended to
find
which is weird um is that the more i
included spirituality like the better my
patients got
and that too is i i don't necessarily
think it's because i'm
that much better of a psychiatrist but i
think people would come to me
with these issues like i lack happiness
in my life
and that's not the same as having major
depressive disorder
sure so over time i've included more and
more spirituality in general like on
twitch i was never planning on talking
about
i thought i would be eating a lot by
twitch i had
when i started streaming on twitch i had
an army of scientific articles to back
up why
i think meditation and yoga is good like
all kinds of stuff like even chanting
why chanting because it's such a strange
meditation technique the scientific
evidence behind why i recommend chanting
so for all the practices that i do i had
like all this science
and what i was stunned is that what
people seem to be
what people ask me about is not in
neuroscience people ask me about his
dharma how do i find my dharma
how do i find purpose how do i find
meaning people identify with like
stories and narratives way more than
52 percent of 72 percent of whatever
scientific article generally is what i
find
i think that's actually an unfair
characterization because i don't think
that
story or narrative is what i talk about
in terms of
so i i think i don't think that that one
is just the story and the other isn't
like i think the two are not really yeah
i don't mean to sound dismissive when i
say story or narrative what i mean is it
like
some something that you can tell
somebody that they can like emotionally
hook into
and like personally identify or
empathize with is going to stick with
somebody's mind way more than
being read like some numbers off the
study is kind of the way that i view it
yeah but when i read numbers off of a
study it's emotionally
it sinks in too you okay i find i find
that that experience
seems to not be the case as much that um
let's say for instance yeah so your go
ahead
yeah i mean i agree with you that that's
not the case as much
but when i cite studies i do so in the
same way that i cite spirituality which
is in theme with my general narrative
sure okay right so i agree that studies
are drier but like that's why like when
you cite a study you have to do it at
the right time
and then it gives you oomph to the story
i just thought that i would be citing
way more studies than scriptures
when i was adding oomph to my points and
what twitch seems to be more interested
in actually is like spirituality which
doesn't mean that they're not interested
in the science
but anyway i didn't mean to cut you off
i just
there was something about that premise
which i didn't feel was fair
sure okay do you um for
one one of the big complaints that i
hear about people that are pursuing like
mental health related stuff is that
there's a very brutal game of trying to
find
the right therapist um so either
somebody that you feel like understands
you or doesn't judge you or is
empathizing with you
in a way that like i guess like rings or
resonates with you more
um how do you suggest two questions on
this
um how do you suggest somebody it sounds
bad but like shops for a therapist like
what's the best way to find a therapist
um and then how can you tell when you
have a therapist that is
challenging you appropriately versus
somebody that you just like don't click
with at all
um yeah great question so first question
is how do you shop for a therapist so
what i recommend that people do so
there's
resource concerns about this right so
that has to be taken into account
but what i recommend that people do is
is make appointments with three
different therapists
and you pick the one that like who's the
webpage you like the most
what is going on
i'm confused by twitch chat sorry oh
yeah i just got turned off with sub mode
so
everybody's free again okay i'm going to
just minimize that because
um but so i was like oh freedom
and i thought we were talking about how
to find therapists and i was like really
confused
but so i'd say like make three
appointments and pick your
you know your top choice first because
therapy is about fit
and then you know i'd space them out by
like two weeks
and um you know when you find someone
that like at the end of the session if
you feel like you can talk to them
and they kind of get you
if it feels good to you then cancel the
others
um and then or or c3 and then pick the
one that you fit
the best now how do you know if you're
being appropriately challenged so i
think the main thing that people need to
understand about therapy is that
if you have a problem in therapy
unlike pretty much any other place it's
the one place where you can go
and you can just tell your therapist
that you have a problem with them
you can walk in and you can say i feel
like this is a [ __ ] waste of my time
and i feel like you're just taking my
[ __ ] money and as a therapist
when people do that i'm like awesome
good and let give your therapist the
benefit
of understanding your difficulty
and letting them work on it like if you
have a problem with a therapist tell
them
so i think i think you're you know i'm a
man and you're a woman and i don't think
you can ever understand what my
experience as a man
is like in this world i don't think that
seeing you is gonna mean anything like
i'm not going to get anything out of
this
just go to your therapist and tell them
that
because i think the big thing that
people don't understand is they think
that a therapist
like has a good fit i mean so i tell you
to find a fit but i think the main thing
that
you need to understand about therapy is
that like in order for therapy to work
the two of you have to work together at
solving your problem
and if your first problem is that you
don't fit that's the thing that you guys
need to solve how can you guys make it
so that the two of you fit
and the the the patients that i tend to
find the most frustrating
are the ones that don't tell me what's
wrong they're hiding thoughts because
they think you won't understand or they
just don't trust
whatever yeah and like one you know
anyway yeah so i've had some experiences
where then they'll because they like
like me
so that you don't want to criticize
someone and they're like i didn't want
to say like
you know this hurt my feelings you got
to tell me man
what if you have a friend that is
struggling with mental illness
in terms of how you view the normal
population what is like what are a
couple ways that you can be
supportive to that person that you feel
like a lot of people miss
i caught you talking about using
reflective language for instance instead
of invalidating somebody's feelings that
seemed like a really helpful tip
um do you have any other like things
like that where it's like when somebody
hears this from a mentally ill person
most people do this but you should
actually do that
are there any things like that um that
you know of offhand
yeah so i think the first is don't
underestimate your impact so this is a
very very common mistake that humans
make
so like let's say you invite a friend to
a party and they say no i don't
no thank you and then you invite them
again and they say no thank you again
and you invite them a third time and
they say no
thank you you assume that they don't
want to be invited
right but the truth is that your
invitation
in and of itself can mean a lot like
they can have social anxiety or they can
be busy
and they can feel like oh it's like
really nice that he keeps inviting me
even though i can't go and for for
friends who are struggling with mental
illness you know you can
even like kind of asking them like hey
is there some way that i can support you
and they say no i'm fine
and then you ask again is there some way
i can support you and they say no i'm
fine
the fact that you're asking even though
you don't see it
helping doesn't mean that it isn't
incredibly healthy
so i think the biggest mistake that
people tend to make is they
undervalue their own contribution to a
relationship
because they don't see a change in the
relationship because of their efforts
but especially with mental illness if
you're doing something
and they don't seem to be changing at
all you could actually be what's keeping
them afloat
because generally speaking mental
illness has a downward trend
so even if you're like hey man do you
want to talk every now and then and they
seem to be doing like the same level of
depression you are there's
i mean generally speaking you're
probably grossly underestimating how
helpful you actually are to that person
okay so i'd say just you know do what
you think is right as a friend
and don't get biased by the perception
that it's not working
gotcha which is bizarre right by the
perception that it isn't working because
it seems like it's not working so why
would you continue doing it but it has
immense value
gotcha because there's some internal um
improvement that's happening there's an
intervention there that feels good even
if you don't see like an external change
of behavior
exactly even though they never come to
your party
you make them feel wanted and cared for
which is hard to see and it's also hard
for them to express
and this is also where you can just kind
of check in with them hey i keep on
asking if you want to come to
the parties or not i'm not sure if
you're busy or what like do you want me
to keep inviting you just ask them
yeah like please let me know when you
have a party
okay um how do you determine um
one of the most frustrating parts about
mental stuff is that you can't force
people obviously to do things they have
to make the choices on their own
um what level of um
intervention i guess um all right
let's say that you have a friend oh use
an example you have a friend with like
really big social anxiety right
um and you know that they've been like
they are trying to like see more people
like in larger groups of friends or
whatever um how do like
is it is is should you make some
positive effort to like kind of push
them
like more or do you leave that entirely
in their court and you just don't ever
push at all
or or like say you have a friend with
depression or whatever i know like for
instance like reckful would stay in bed
sometimes for months because he was so
depressed he would never get out
like do you ever like show up at that
person's house it's like get up we're
going outside like come on
like do you think that those types of
interventions are responsible or do you
think that you're depriving the other
person of their own
choices too much or how do you view
stuff like that like when can you make a
determination as we're not professionals
um for when like you like should
intervene a little bit more to help
somebody that's kind of struggling with
that kind of stuff what do you think
what's your compass um
i i guess the way that i view it is that
if i feel like if i feel like somebody
is engaging in a behavior
that seems to me to just be incredibly
destructive
and or self-destructive i guess and it
doesn't seem like
there is any benefit for them to
continue to pursue that behavior
and if i have evidence in the past that
intervening
seems to have positive impacts so for
instance i know that sometimes people
will be depressed they don't want to
come out like but every time you get
them out they seem to have a really good
experience and they'll even admit as
much
um that like usually those are the types
of interventions i would try to push for
because i know that if i can at least
get them to move a little bit that
they'll start to feel better before
having moved yeah
sounds like a great answer to me okay
right so i i think that this is where
um this also leads to a lot of confusion
i i think that
sometimes we forget that mental health
is more than
treatment in fact it's so much more than
treatment
and friendship is one of the best things
that you can do for someone mental
health
right like you can look at studies that
show i mean so
you know you can look at studies with
like pets and like pets improve
cardiovascular health they improve
mental health
it's not a treatment it's not medicine
but it can still
help immensely and so i think you should
think about what your dharma
or duty as a friend is
and that dharma is going to be different
from the dharma of a mental health
profession
because it is grossly inappropriate for
me to show up at my patient's door
right it's like what if they just like
are they depressed or do they think i'm
a [ __ ] [ __ ] and just stopped
taking my calls and responding to my
emails
so i think you should do your duty as a
friend
and if that means showing up and
crossing certain boundaries that maybe a
mental health professional can't cross
because then that's okay i mean i think
that that's
that's what friends are for right okay
and and i think the main thing to think
about there is
you know just to really be very careful
about examining your own feelings and
also to check in with them
about you know like i i think friends
need to learn like just in general as
a society we need to learn to have like
more conversations
about you know the the meta level of our
relationship
yeah i notice that we rely a lot on
context clues
or on body language sometimes when like
people um
because of all the sexual assault
allegations we went over a lot of this
and
um the answer that i always give for 99
of like confusion and i'm sure
everybody's talking about relationships
thing is like just have a conversation
like just talk about this like
have like why would you try to guess
like don't try to figure out like
how they're feeling or like just talk
about it like have a conversation is the
easiest way to
elucidate you know like the issues and
it seems like so many people don't do
that
have any of those meta-level
conversations about any of their
relationships sexual or non-sexual or
friendships anything yeah
yeah we just don't talk about it what's
our relationship
um you and me um
a quasi-friendly quasi-professional
i guess we'd talk on streaming yeah i
enjoyed talking to you yeah yeah
okay and so i think of us as
colleagues on the road to becoming
friends okay
you play dota though not league right
yeah so you know
significant road bump but
can't have everything yeah
um let's see i'm trying to think of have
you played
um i are you um do you know the sunken
cost rule
yeah yeah something i'll see it's not a
fallacy okay i've sunk too much time
into league to ever learn another game i
can't
switch now even if even if switching at
this point in my life would produce
better outcomes for me
just can't okay i'm dug into league i'm
sorry you won't catch me saying this
anywhere else dusty but
it's not it seems to me like they're
both great games really
yeah oh man i have such a my view of
humanity worsens every time i get into a
new
a new lobby but okay i admire your
new lobby and law yes no i mean that's
all i agree with
i i think the fact that you're your view
of humanity but that has nothing to the
game that has to do with the
the players oh i mean the game itself is
okay
the game itself was pretty good but
unfortunately you have to do it
nine other people god willing alongside
you uh going after hopefully the same
goals but
well i mean hopefully five of them are
not going after the same goal as you
yeah oh yeah sure yeah but
um what is your what is your end goal
with your
you talk a lot about the organization
that you kind of have with all the
people that you're
training up to be counselors or like
what what
capacity coaches okay coaches um
what capacity do you want the
organization to serve in the future like
what's your end goal with that
like realistic end goal and then like
dream end goal i guess so
it's interesting so the the short answer
is i don't have an end goal because this
thing was never
conceived to go to a particular place
right so the first question you asked me
is like what did you expect from twitch
and have you been surprised and the
answer is i expected
i don't i don't even remember what i
expected but the short answer was not
much and i've been very surprised
so it's weird like because because
i mean every step of the way has been in
trying to figure out
like what is the next step i need to
take it's really not about an income
and the reason we started the coaching
program is because i got thousands of
requests per month for people like
hey can i talk to dr k like i'll
pay you any amount of money for just one
hour of your time
and as lucrative as that may be
you know i didn't think i could actually
help people so then the question becomes
so one of my friends i was talking to
one of my colleagues is also a
psychiatrist
and she was saying like jokingly like
either you need to
you know duplicate yourself or like
maybe come up with some kind of courses
or something like that
like write a book and what she was
saying is that you should write a book
and i was like i wonder if i can
duplicate myself
and yeah and this goes to the idea that
i'm something special which people think
i'm special but i don't think i'm that
special
and so the more special i am the harder
it is to duplicate myself but the real
question is
because i i did feel like so the reason
we started the coaching program is
because i
started on stream and what i really
wanted to show people
so the reason we started streaming was
because i was having individual
conversations with gamers for like four
years and it was like the same 35
like problem points yeah like 35
problems that pretty much all gamers
like any given gamer is gonna fall into
like 99
of them are going to fall into these
like 35 issues so
my thought was like i'm having the same
[ __ ] conversation with like a dozen
people
what if i just stream that conversation
could people watching benefit
turns out that the answer is like sort
of yes
then the question is like but we want
one-on-one and i'm like can i really
transform someone's life by streaming
some people will actually say yes i
still tend to be pretty skeptical
and i find that it's it's like hard to
substitute
one-on-one support with like youtube
videos even if the topics remember
don't ever don't ever underestimate the
impact you can have on somebody but yeah
absolutely right so i've i've learned
that yeah but then my thought was like
okay so what's missing from a healthy
gamer sure i can go on stream and i can
have these conversations and i can teach
about stuff
but what's missing is one-on-one and
that's why we started coaching
now the interesting thing that's there
are deficiencies that have come out of
coaching
which is that like people want so like
they want
more in depth than what we can offer on
stream and the coaches have a skill set
but they don't have my knowledge base
so the next thing that we're working on
on a healthy gamer is like
um can you hold on a second i'll just
show you yeah
so
so so what i basically noticed is that
like people are asking for more
in-depth stuff about meditation or more
in-depth stuff about ayurveda
or like more in-depth stuff about like
alexithymia and getting in touch with
your emotions
so and the coaches are actually really
helpful and they they're good outcomes
from our coaching program
um but they don't have the depth of
knowledge which actually people are sort
of ask us to stream about stuff
where now the problem that we're running
into is i don't think streaming
is the best way to disseminate
is the best way to disseminate like
comprehensive knowledge does that make
sense um
sure because you can't be responsive to
like individual like questions or
because you have to break things down on
an individual level for somebody to
understand
because my understanding is that
streaming people jump in and out
so oh okay okay let's do this so we're
gonna go
okay so i'm gonna maximize this
share my screen
okay
okay can you see this um
[Music]
i'm gonna click something say watch
stream yes okay
can you see the word doc yeah
so like so this is so the next thing for
healthy gamer is this
so this is like uh like essentially the
outline of a book about meditation
and um so this is like what's come out
from our coaching program is that people
want
more let me try to find just one example
yeah so let's do like the anxiety primer
so like this is just like my
understanding of anxiety
and all the different kinds of anxiety
that people can can experience
and this is what our community needs
next so first it was streaming
then it was like okay people need
one-on-one and then people like
our coaches can help them with ego but
they don't have
quite the depth of knowledge about how
to like the the know-how of how to
remove ego
they can actually help they're actually
pretty good with ego um
and so like this is what's next
and you know where does it end up i'm
i'm not quite sure to be honest
okay because i just don't i just don't
know i mean i'm gonna try to help
so the other thing when it comes to
dharma or duty is like it occurs to me
that
i have a so you know when you think
about karma in dharma so to kind of tie
things up
so i think i was given a very unique set
of circumstances in life
and i think that with ability comes
responsibility
and it was weird i was talking to like
this guy named uh
bobby scar and he was kind of saying
like i predicted someone like you would
show up on twitch one day
he was like i called it okay and i think
that there's a group
so what healthy gamer is about
is it's about healthy gamers so it's not
actually about like treating video game
addiction it's about like building a
healthy life this is what we've been
talking about
there's a difference between mental
illness and like building happiness and
fulfillment and that's really what our
goals are as an organization
yeah it's like the difference between
going to a hospital and being sent out
when you're no longer dying versus
actually like working out exercising
having like a healthy
body exactly and so i think the thing
that's been really confusing
from an organization standpoint or a
stream standpoint is people
because i talk about emotions they
assume that that's therapy
but no like i think that's the [ __ ]
problem with our society is that we
don't we don't
have these conversations about
relationships we don't have
conversations about emotions
you were kind of saying we weren't
taught how to be happy absolutely that's
what i'm trying to fix
is we weren't taught how to like gain
meaning and purpose in life we weren't
taught how we as human beings work we
have classes about
science and mathematics and economics
but nothing about why you can't
stop drinking soda
and so what our mission is and
is just to help people put their lives
together
and to become healthy gamers
right i don't want like i'm not really
for abstinence for
from video games i think it it's
necessary for some people
and certainly for some period of time
but like we want to build healthy gamers
and when
there are enough healthy gamers i guess
at some point i'm going to burn out or
quit
but generally probably working for a
while but yeah
i yeah i mean you know so i'm just going
to try to help people so i think it's i
kind of view our organization and where
it's going in the same way that
i think about because it's the only way
you can do it mentally and stay sane
when i'm working in the emergency room
it's like what's my end goal i have no
[ __ ] clue it depends on what walks in
the door
sure and as long as people are walking
in the door and asking us to do stuff
we're gonna do our best to do it
okay um i don't know how many questions
i've asked you've gone over on stream a
million times so i'm sorry if i'm
hitting a lot of like common talking
points
um i guess just like a final question
then we draw to an end here
because a lot of people in my audience
might be listening that haven't heard
these things before
um uh in terms of if you have like new
people listening what do you think is
like the most
positive thing an individual can do to
make like great strides towards becoming
mentally healthier that you think most
people don't already do
like what's like one thing that you
think is missing from a lot of twitch
audiences life
that they could be doing that would help
them greatly
i mean i have a generic answer and then
i have a specific answer
because i feel like the generic answer
is like not actionable which frustrates
me
so the generic answer is i think you
should understand yourself in the same
way that you try to understand external
things
so in your audience in particular so
destiny i think you've cultivated a good
audience or attitude or culture
of like critical thinking the problem is
that we don't critically think about
ourselves
yeah practically what i would say is
that a lot of people
i suspect in your audience think they
think critically about themselves
every yeah right but the truth is that
they don't so here's what i'd say
a classic example of this is like the
gamer who feels like they're in control
of their emotions
because they don't cry during a sad
movie or can watch horror films or
things like that
right like they don't have emotional
responses the way that
other people do and they pride
themselves on this that's not being in
control of your emotions that's just
numbing your emotions
so practically what i would if i had to
give someone a practical tip
it's look at your behavior and try to
figure out what are the different
variables that influence your behavior
and unless you can do something
arbitrary for no reason you're not in
control of yourself
so if people think that you're in
control of yourself and you can't
pick you know the last thing that you
ate that was unhealthy unless you can
knock that out of your diet for 60 days
you're not in control
and then tunnel down into what is it
that makes
that contributes to behavior because
behavior is really really complicated a
lot of variables
and understand your behavior and
understand yourself
and for people who want to be successful
i don't think they understand like
everyone looks for success
outside of themselves they're like
you've got to do this or like
i remember there was some guy on youtube
that was spamming
maybe due to my search history or
cookies or whatever about how he like
reads a thousand books and i'm like i
don't think
i don't think reading like we all think
that reading a thousand books makes you
successful like sure reading is
important i've read a [ __ ] ton of books
but doing no i don't believe that
success comes from doing some specific
formula externally i think you just got
to understand like
how you work as a person and that's and
i think that's what people need to like
take away is like understand how you
work
because we're playing this game of life
without understanding the buttons on the
controller
yeah it's like do you is there um do you
have a good
um i 100 agree with what you're saying
um do you have good like
tricks to check if you're lying to
yourself yeah perfect
yeah absolutely so the biggest thing to
understand about lying to yourself
so here's here's how the mind works okay
i'm going to do an abbreviated version
you guys can check this out in the
webinars and stuff because i've
explained this with
whiteboard and all that good stuff so i
also think that eastern psychology in a
lot of ways is superior to western
psychology because of the way
in which it was developed that's maybe a
conversation for a different day
sure but our mind has an emotional
component this is called the among us
and the manas is the emotional mind and
also reacts to things
so if you think about do you like sushi
no
okay when you ate your first piece of
sushi
how quickly did you know that you didn't
like it
um
i don't know i usually like i eat
something i think about it i'd swallow
it i can tell usually in a
i don't know 10 15 seconds it doesn't
take me that long to figure it out i
would say even less
i would be surprised if if it took you
longer than a second sure for me i
i don't like seafood so the first time i
really tried sushi it was like a year
ago but i went to a really nice
restaurant with some friends because i
wanted to like give it a good try before
writing it off so i really did think
about it but yeah
but yeah generally yeah for like a food
piece of food i don't like usually know
pretty quickly
yeah sometimes even smelling it so
there's this one part of your mind
that reacts to things and so the yogi's
thought that emotions
and reactions like stamping something
with like or dislike
oh like i like that song or i don't like
that song or oh that's a cool shirt
there isn't a culture
the reactionary mind is the same as the
emotional mind
so we also tend to experience emotions
very rapidly right
if you walk in and then your ex walks
into the same restaurant
you have an emotional reaction that
takes less than a second
so your emotional mind acts that's manus
that's the emotional line
the second piece of the mind is the
buddhi or the analytical mind the
logical mind and we all know that like
emotions and logic
are not the same part right like you
can't overcome emotions with logic or
you can or that's difficult we can get
that into that whole process
whatever yeah so the thing that people
don't understand is that between the
emotions and the logic
is this thing called the ahamka or the
ego okay
and what the ahamkar does is it
activates to protect you from negative
emotions
so when you feel bad the ego activates
and then what the ego does is it bullies
your intellectual mind into coming up
with
justifications and you can argue
logically against justifications and
what happens if you like argue with
someone
about why they do something and they
present justifications
um it feels like they'll bounce back and
forth between whatever they'll either
invent or fabricate some or they'll
exactly yeah right so that's the
question you're post-hoc rationalizing
you're doing it after the fact you don't
care what the justification is so the
question is like
like how do you know whether your
intellectual mind
is justifying things or objectively
analyzing things how do you know
and the short answer is whether your ego
is present or not
right so even when you have a political
argument if you can calm down and have a
discussion with them
where their ego is absent then they can
change their mind
so basically your intellect functions
well
if your ego is inactive and when does
ego become
active it becomes active when you
experience negative emotion generally
speaking
and so it really starts with it's not
about whether you're in control it's
about the presence
of or the absence of emotion and if you
can't detect
emotion and you can't detect and notice
your ego
then your rational mind is not thinking
properly yeah
so that just seems scary because i guess
when i think of like these these
these sorts of like like almost
cognitive distortions like
nobody feels like they ever have them so
it seems really like everybody feels
like they're honest with themselves
yeah so that's the beauty of what the
yogi's figured out is they're like okay
how do i know when my intellect is
working properly it has to do with the
presence of emotion and ego
and until you can see and label those
things within yourself then your
emotional
i mean then your analytical mind will
function well because you're like oh
that's my ego the first step then to
figuring out if you're lying
if we draw it back then to figure out if
you're lying to yourself
the first step of that process is can i
identify when i'm being emotional
yep and then if you can do that then you
can bring these
topics in in a place where you're not
being emotional and then analyze them
but if you feel like you're becoming
emotional you have to be able to
recognize that the tricky thing is that
most people aren't going to even be able
to recognize their emotions
for sure yeah right so the the first so
i would start
by assuming that if you don't
uh detect emotion that some emotion is
there you start by assuming that you're
not actually logical
because chances are you aren't and until
your like eq gets well developed and you
can detect your emotions
and then also detect your ego right and
this like you can kind of see this where
like the example that i use is let's say
you ask out a girl
and then she says no and then you say ah
she wasn't that attractive anyway
and then you tell your friends she was
like yeah i wasn't that into her
yeah of course yeah yeah you're a [ __ ]
anyway i didn't even know exactly
right but like like that's clearly
illogical but you can't
explain that to that person and why so
when she says no
in your emotional mind you feel
rejection and then your ego's like oh
[ __ ]
let's tank that and then then it pumps
you up
and then puts other people down so
another sign there are a couple i'll
leave you with one last point because
they're not going to be able to detect
their emotions any time you're making a
comparison
that's ego if you are comparing your
logic is incorrect
gotcha period okay
one of the um as a quick aside one of
the easy i consider myself to be pretty
emotionally aware i i'd like to think i
am but then
there are times when even i realize um
way too late oftentimes something as
stupid as like
man i think i just need to [ __ ] eat
because i'm in a really bad mood right
now i don't even think i realize that
and then you eat and then afterwards
once you're out of it you're like
wow holy [ __ ] i was really hungry i
can't believe i was just like a huge ass
over two hours when i just needed some
food
something as stupid as that um that's
arguably less impactful than like having
a fight with somebody or having a
negative experience with somebody else
so yeah for sure i understand what you
mean 100
yeah okay so yeah cool man
okay cool um i appreciate the
conversation i really
like it yeah um if i have a specific
topic
i'll bring it up in the future what
would you say yeah i was just gonna say
because i
i remember etiquette from before so like
i i assume that everyone knows who you
are
because i just assume everyone knows who
you are but do you want to tell people
if they don't like i
was just assuming but it just occurred
to me that maybe people don't know who
you are
do you want to oh sure um i'm destiny i
stream at twitch.tv slash destiny we
talk about politics and philosophy a lot
and then we play video games too
depending on what's going on for current
events
yeah cool well thanks a lot destiny i
really appreciate the conversation i
enjoy talking to you
yeah i appreciate it as well also
etiquette do you want to introduce
yourself in case some people watching on
my stream might know who you are
uh yeah but i mean i had a chance to
talk to about myself a lot
so i think people should have figured it
i mean i imagine okay
healthy game or underscore gg you are
trying to raise money for something
though right what do you collect
no you're not oh you guys raised all the
money you needed
yeah i mean the community gave us a ton
of money so we're fine
yeah so like what are you making well
the first big business mistake you're
making is you have to keep increasing
those goals you got to get more and more
no money right that's not
what we do seriously destiny i know it's
bizarre i mean
we've had people trying to still give us
five-figure donations
stuff and we're like nope i think
we're nope okay well that's awesome cool
well good luck with what you guys are
doing
um you're genuinely really cool there's
very very very few people that i talk to
that i actually respect and look up to
and you're like one of those very few
there's like two people actually there's
you
that i really enjoy talking to and then
another guy called sean carroll yeah you
two are
really awesome people so how insulting
to everyone else you've talked to
um most people know that i have very
[ __ ] negative views of everybody and
i mean like in terms of like
if you say something i'm more likely to
believe it without feeling like i have
to go and like check it and i'm
instantly like incredibly hostile or
combative towards a thought like if you
say something that challenges like a
preconceived notion that i have
i'm more likely to like default assume i
might be incorrect on something and then
really ponder what you're saying and try
to like incorporate that into what i'm
thinking like yeah
can i ask you i appreciate that man i
really respect you as well i
and you know we don't do much on twitch
that isn't like
our stuff because we don't have a whole
lot of time to stream and i think there
are a lot of people to help
and and i but i really love do love
talking to you
um look can i toss out one last thing
i'll try to send you the paper
but i had a wild thought recently and i
just love to get your thoughts on it
so it was recently a study i think on um
because
we've talked a little bit about
psychedelics before i think yeah
or or you've talked about it or whatever
i don't know if you and i have talked
about it
so a lot of people ask me questions
about psychedelics so i saw an
interesting study and it just really
i clicked in some way and i don't know
if this is completely idiotic
so there's a study i think with mdma or
psilocybin i forget
where something like 68 of people who
use mdma or psilocybin felt a connection
with like some kind of being
and and the being was like positive okay
like cared about them and i was just
really surprised by
the high percentage of a common
experience
because my assumption would have been
that if you use
psychedelics like i know that there are
some substances that you know like mdma
for example makes you feel like more
connected to people
but i was surprised by the the
uniformity of their experience of like
presence
of this other being or beings
and then i was kind of thinking like oh
that's actually like scientifically
that's very interesting that they have a
consistent experience across
all kinds of random people because i
would have expected all kinds of random
things
really okay um well i mean it's within
certain bounds right so like we know
that mdama like
increases your like like empathy and
stuff like that but
but to detect a being is a strange
scientific result
sure and it got me wondering whether
like actually
mdma and psilocybin are um
maybe like the next version of the
telescope
in the sense that that you know in we
have a general reality that we can
perceive and then as human beings we
develop
instruments and then anyone who looks
through the telescope sees a relatively
common thing
even though like normal people can't see
it but when you have enough human beings
who share a common sensory experience
at what point does that become reality
as opposed to just something that you're
hallucinating for sure
um obviously very responsible make sure
that everything is safe
consult a doctor if you're taking a drug
um like ssris will interact with
oh yeah i wouldn't recommend taking
psychedelics i'm not that's oh okay
i'm not i don't okay sorry i should have
been clear i was just wondering what you
think about the principle
of sorry what what you think about the
principle
of like whether it's possible that
psychedelics could actually give us
frontiers into reality that we're
otherwise not able to perceive
much like a telescope it's a theoretical
oh that's um
that's a really good question i'm
actually going to have a conversation
with tomorrow um i'm going to butcher
his last name
um will suey see you we'll we'll suit
yeah yeah about that yeah because i had
a really
yeah huge mushroom trip that i still
have trouble making sense of
um i think that the perspectives that
you gain on
stuff like mushrooms or lsd um
are invaluable um
it's hard i don't want to have this kind
of i'm not trying to recommend drugs to
your audience i'm trying to be
responsible for that but like there's
definitely
um there are worlds that exist
under psychedelic drugs that are
inaccessible in my opinion to
most people that that's fine so i'm
also i'm not recommending so i've also
just so you guys know from a safety
perspective i've had several people
reach out to me when we've talked about
psychedelics actually saying
they have ptsd or bad anxiety from
psychedelics so psychedelic usage can
actually be like very harmful
um so so and i think if you guys want
more information will is a great person
to talk to
uh so with the question that i have for
you though is do you think that those
experiences are ensconced to you or do
you think they could be reflective of
actually an objective reality
outside of your mind um
man sorry i'm trying to think of like
abbreviated forms of this
you don't have to answer now you just oh
i just wanted to get your thoughts on
like
because i want you to think about it but
the big problem that i had was that i
had a very very large mushroom trip and
it actually
like that term that you use objective
reality is one that i don't use anymore
because that
big mushroom trip really um undermined
my opinion of how well i can be in tune
with any sort of objective reality
um when you've done a certain um maybe
similar to what um schizophrenics feel
um when you've done enough of a certain
substance that can induce hallucinations
or make your senses
otherwise lie to you or cause you to
have a conscious experience that feels
very otherworldly or unrelated to your
normal one
i think it really undermines your sense
of how well you can truly understand any
part of the world
because yeah for most people you've
never experienced having a sensory organ
lie to you like you don't know what it's
like for your eye or your ear to report
something
that absolutely doesn't exist and once
you've experienced that
in like in a highly drug state i think
it
it feels a little bit weird to um it
feels a little bit weird to think that
like
you can have this like super big key
into like an objective reality
um this kind of like goes away from your
question though but your original
question is like could we use these to
gain further insights into objective
reality
um i'm guessing because you're saying
that we all have shared experiences it
seems to be
on these drugs it's possible that
because we all have like similar
backgrounds
um and because we all have like similar
like shared biology that doing like a
certain type of drug is more likely to
bring a certain experience
up to the surface so maybe for instance
western people would report a different
experience on a psychedelic drug
than like um maybe indians or japanese
people or
some form of eastern um it's a good
stuff
yeah um yeah i don't know when you said
yeah it's not surprising to me that
people would report similar experiences
just because we all have like so much
shared culture
and biology but i think it's worth
exploring and i think that the type of
shared experiences that you have
that in and of itself might be
insightful um so for instance for
i'm this is conjecture maybe true maybe
not but a lot of atheists might say like
oh gods aren't important people don't
need those
and then let's say that all of the human
population tries mushrooms
and 95 percent of people report um i had
an experience where i felt incredibly
close to a divine being and it made me
feel so incredibly at peace
well maybe coming out of that experience
maybe like well okay maybe it's a little
bit foolish to completely throw out the
idea of any type of like god-like figure
it seems like it's pretty integral
to like you know the human psyche like
so yeah i do think that there could be
something worth investigating there
sorry that was a really roundabout way
of answering that question
yeah that's that's what these
conversations are about man
sure yeah also for mdma i truly i would
stake money on this not that i was here
somebody do it but i do not believe that
two people
in the same room no matter how much they
hate each other i do not think it's
possible that two people could do mdma
and come out of that room still hating
each other
it is an incredibly empathetic drug
like um yeah it's yeah the connections
you fill in that are unbelievable
jesus but maybe that's because i'm
normally like an emotionally
disconnected person maybe i'm getting
closer to
um what what how people would normally
experience emotions but yeah wow
yeah so i mean seriously destiny i i
would be careful dude
like of course people watching and stuff
too because like stuff
so so just so you guys know and you can
ask will more about this but you know
will was
was telling me that psychedelic assisted
psychotherapy
is uh is you know normally done
like you'll you'll do like maybe four or
five months of therapy with three uses
of psychedelics in between with
appropriate time to process and like
controlled amounts
i mean i've really heard people should
really be careful because like
you know part of the problem is you
don't know what you're getting
yeah for sure and i would consider
myself like i think i have a very very
strong and well put together mind
and i completely underestimated um
psilocybin mushrooms and i deal with
things like anxiety and stuff now i
can't smoke
not that i would recommend it but i
can't smoke weed for instance without
having panic attacks which i'd never
experienced prior to doing
uh psychedelic mushrooms so it's
definitely something that you should be
incredibly respectful of and very
careful of
yeah i mean i would really just steer
clear i mean i know that a lot of people
are into it but like
it's just i mean neither there can i
mean it can be harmful but
talk to will i think he'll he knows more
than i do about that so yeah it'll be a
fun conversation yeah
all right man well thank you so much for
talking man i appreciate it
yep i appreciate the conversation it's
been fun oh thank you thank you i have
questions in the future